$Id: README,v 1.4 2004-09-21 20:12:00 wilsonp Exp $

Thank you for your interest in ALARA.

Please see the INSTALL file for generic details on building and
installing packages using 'configure' and 'make'.  When building
ALARA, you should run 'configure' and 'make' from the main 'alara-2.x.y'
directory and NOT from the 'src' directory.

Some test/sample files are included in directory './sample'.  Once the
alara executable is in your path, they can all be run in succession,
with output stored in a directory "sample_out" by executing the
script:
%> cd sample
%> ./run_samples.sh sample_out
A reference set of output is available in directory ./sample/ref_out.
You can expect difference between your test output and the reference
output with respect to the timing results and the directory locations
of output files.

In addition to building and installing the ALARA program, this package
includes an accessory program, dant2alara, and a pair of Perl scripts
for post-processing data.

dant2alara...
...is an interactive program for converting RTFLUX/ATFLUX files (from
DANTSYS and similar) to text based flux files for use in ALARA.  Since
ALARA can read RTFLUX files directly, this use may not be useful.  On
the other hand, the biological dose method requires ggamma source to
dose conversion factors from an ATFLUX type file, which can not be
handled directly by ALARA at this time.

extract_pathways...
.... is a Perl script that scans an ASCII tree file and finds all the
chains/pathways that result in a given isotope.

summary ....
... is a Perl script that extracts a summary of the output file, most
notably removing all results for individual isotopes and leaving all
totals.  You can also extract results for a single specific isotopes
by giving the argument "-iso" followed by the isotope in question
written as a lower case atomic symbol hyphenated with the mass
number. e.g. tritium is h-3.
